---
layout: post
title: "Computer Organization : Floating Point"
categories: Computer-Organization
tags: [Computer-Organization]
math: true
---
### Floating Point
Floating point is a representation for non-integer numbers like 2.74, 1.37, and -5.16.

In binary, we store non-integer real number like below.
$$\pm 1.xxxxx \times 2^{yyyy}$$

When it comes to C programming language, we can list two types for that; `float` and `double`.

---

#### Floating Point Standard
- Defined by IEEE
- Two representations for single precision(32-bit), and double precision(64-bit).

We can split this representation into three part
1. Sign bit 
2. Exponent 
3. Fraction 

A sign bit notifies you whether the given number is negative (if 1) or positive (if 0).

Fraction is, however, unlike other part, it has implicit assumption that 'one' is already added due to its range.

$$Fraction \in \{x \in \mathbb{R} | 1.0 \leq x < 2.0\}$$

Exponent is the quirky one amongst those three part of floating point representation due to bias term it contains.
As we want not only non-negative exponent but also negative, instead of traditional integer representation, we explit bias term.

We calculate $effective\,exponent=actual\,exponent+bias$ where bias is 127, 1023 for single precision and double precision standard.

|        |single precision|double precision|
|--------|:--------------:|:--------------:|
|exponent|       8        |       11       |
|fraction|       23       |       52       |

Let's see some illustrations so that we can fully understand how it works.

---

-0.75 = (-1) $\times\,2^{-1}\,\times 1.5$ 
which can be represented like below.

```markdown
1     01111110    00000000000000000000001
(-1) 126 - 127              1 + 0.5 = 1.5
```

Thus, in single precision floating point format, we can represent -0.75 with 10111111000000000000000000000001.
You might saw some numbers like `inf` or `-inf` before when you wrote Python code with NumPy.

How this kind of `NaN` or `inf` implemented?
This is implemented like below.

```markdown
inf (-inf)
sign : 0 ( 1 )
exponent : 11111111
fraction : 0000000000 0000000000 000

NaN (Not-a-Number) : illustrates illegal or undefined result
exponent : 11111111
fraction : non-zero vector (or bit array)
```

Below is the table of special cases of floating point.

| Object represented |Exponent|Fraction |
|:------------------:|:------:|:-------:|
|         0          |   0    |    0    |
|denormalized number |   0    |Non-zero |
|      infinity      | Max-Val|    0    |
|        NaN         | Max-Val|Non-zero |

---

#### Floating-Point Addition
Consider a 4-digit decimal example like below.
$9.999 \times 10^1 + 1.610 \times 10^{-1}$

1. Align decimal points
2. Add significands
3. Normalize result & check for over/underflow
4. Round and renormalize if necessary 

---

Example in decimal >

$9.999 \times 10^1 + 0.016 \times 10^1$

$10.015 \times 10^1$

$1.0015 \times 10^2$

$1.002 \times 10^2$


