---
layout: post
title: "Computer Organization : Divide"
categories: Computer-Organization
tags: [Computer-Organization]
math: true
---
### Divide
During elementary school time, we learned how to divide numbers and this operation is less frequently used than multiply operation but much more quirky.

However, the essence of implementation of divide operation is not that different from our way of `do-it-by-hand` method.

<div>
  \[ Dividend = Divisor \times Quotient + Remainder \]
</div>

Suppose that we can represent given numbers in n-bit array. 
(In this example, we will only consider `unsigned integer` to merely check out how this operation works)

#### Simple Implementation : Based on subtraction
Flow chart below is summarization of simple (or naive) version of divide operation implementation.

<div class="mermaid">
flowchart TD
    start((Start)) --> A[Subtract divisor from remainder<br/>Place result in remainder register]
    A --> B{Test Remainder}
    
    B -- Remainder ≥ 0 --> C[2a. Shift Quotient left<br/>Set rightmost bit to 1]
    B -- Remainder < 0 --> D[2b. Add Divisor to Remainder<br/>Set Remainder = sum<br/>Shift Quotient left<br/>Set least bit to 0]
    
    C --> E[Shift Divisor register<br/>right 1 bit]
    D --> E
    
    E --> F{33rd repetition?}
    F -- No (< 33) --> A
    F -- Yes --> Done((Done))
</div>

When given numbers can be represented into N-bit arrays, we should repeat the operation for N + 1 times. Therefore, given flowchart assumes that we represent numbers with 32-bit registers.

Merely seeing flowchart will be not that helpful for understanding how it actually works.
Thus, let's see simple example : `7 divided by 2`.

7 and 2 can be represented like following

```markdown
Numbers represented in binary
7 = 0111
2 = 0010
```

| Iteration | Quotient |  Divisor  | Remainder |
| :-------: | :------: | :-------: | :-------: |
|     0     |   0000   | 0010 0000 | 0000 0111 |
|     1     |   0000   | 0001 0000 | 0000 0111 |
|     2     |   0000   | 0000 1000 | 0000 0111 |
|     3     |   0000   | 0000 0100 | 0000 0111 |
|     4     |   0001   | 0000 0010 | 0000 0011 |
|     5     |   0011   | 0000 0001 | 0000 0001 |

As it is represented as 4-bit array, we have to iterate for five times. In result, we get 3 as quotient, and 1 as remainder for given divide operation.

You can see that there are some memory inefficiency as we have to prepare $2N$ bit registers and ALU for handling those numbers.

#### Optimized Implementation
This version of divide operation only requires 32-bit register (for Divisor) and ALU.

How can we attain such progress? We will store actual remainder and Quotient at $2N + 1$-bit register (previously called `remainder` register)

N-bits are for remainder of divide operation while remaining N + 1 bits store Quotient (as it can be any value in real number).

Let's see some examples for further understanding of how divide operation worked during the early stage of Computer Science.
We first assign divisor register = `0010 0000`.

|   Iteration   |         Steps        |  Remainder |
| :-----------: | :------------------: | :--------: |
|       0       |                      | 00000 0111 |   
|      1.a      |   Rem = Rem - div    | 11110 0111 |
|      1.b      |       Rem < 0        | 00000 0111 |
|      1.c      | Shift remainder left | 00000 1110 |
|      2.a      |   Rem = Rem - div    | 11110 1110 |
|      2.b      |       Rem < 0        | 00000 1110 |
|      2.c      | Shift remainder left | 00001 1100 |
|      3.a      |   Rem = Rem - div    | 11111 1100 |
|      3.b      |       Rem < 0        | 00001 1100 |
|      3.c      | Shift remainder left | 00011 1000 |
|      4.a      |   Rem = Rem - div    | 00001 1000 |
|      4.b      |      Rem >= 0        | 00001 1000 |
|      4.c      | Shift remainder left | 00011 0001 |
|      5.a      |   Rem = Rem - div    | 00001 0000 |
|      5.b      |      Rem >= 0        | 00001 0000 |
|      5.c      | Shift remainder left | 00010 0011 |

The first N-bits represent remainder of divide operation while other remaining N + 1 bits represent Quotient.

```markdown
0001  : 1
00011 : 3
```

Although this algorithm is now obsolete and not used contemporaly but it is a greate mile stone of understanding
how computer works in architectural level.

When we use division instruction in `MIPS assembly`, there are two reserved registers storing remainder and quotient for each;
`HI` : for remainder
`LO` : for quotient

After the instructions like `div rs, rt` or `divu rs, rt`, we can get result using instructions like `mfhi` or `mflo`.
